- In nature,
animals compete to survive.
The fittest, fastest, strongest,
or smartest will make it.
And for most of human history,
we, too, have struggled
to survive.
Finding food, fighting disease,
and dealing with
the environment around us
have all been great challenges.
But humans
have overcome many of these.
Our population has exploded
as we've built cities,
farmed land,
and developed cures
for most of the major diseases
of the past.
Today humans have
the understanding and technology
to alter
the basic structures of life,
the genetic code
of any living organism.
We could ensure
every baby is healthy
or make crops grow
in the desert.
But how is this possible?
And what precautions
do we need to take?
In this program,
we look at the science
behind the benefits
of genetic engineering,
including genetic manipulation:
the basics;
genetic manipulation:
what, why, and how;
human uses
of genetic manipulation,
agricultural uses
environmental uses
of genetic manipulation,
and ethical issues.
You probably know genes
provide the information
for all cells,
tissues, and organs
that make up our bodies.
They're our blueprint.
We could say genes are
the instruction book
for all the proteins
that make up our structure.
Our genes are made up of DNA.
That's deoxyribonucleic acid.
You might recognize
the DNA double helix.
It's structured like a ladder.
The rungs of the ladder
are the four nucleotides.
They link together like this.
Adenine links to thymine.
Cytosine links to guanine.
These base-pairs line up
in a specific order.
It's this order that determines
which protein
the gene codes for.
The process of reading
the DNA instructions
and building
the protein they describe
is called protein synthesis.
It starts in the nucleus
where the DNA is untwisted,
then read and copied
into a strand of messenger RNA,
or mRNA.
We call this transcription.
It's important to remember
that the information in a gene
is read in the lots
of three bases.
Each triplet of bases
is called a codon.
Each codon is the information
for a specific amino acid.
The mRNA moves out into the cell
where the codons are translated
into their matching amino acid.
These are linked together
to form a protein.
So that's how DNA works
as the body's blueprint.
So what would happen
if we could take out a segment
of the DNA and change
the function of a gene?
We'd be changing a chapter
in the instruction book.
That's called gene manipulation.
Before scientists can change
the genetic makeup
of an organism,
they need to understand
which genes
carry which information.
So let's take a closer look
at a gene
and see how that's done.
A gene is made up of a promoter,
a coding section,
and then a stop codon.
The promoter marks the start
of the gene.
It's like the on-off switch.
And at the end of the gene
is the stop codon.
This gives the instruction
to stop making the protein.
Some sections of the DNA
are noncoding.
We also call them junk DNA.
These sections
don't carry any instructions
for making proteins.
Here's a coding section of DNA.
It's our gene.
This section
carries information.
If scientists can figure out
what a gene codes for,
then they have the option
of changing that information.
Genes can be moved, copied,
or even put
into other organisms.
More about that in a moment.
Genes provide the instructions
for all the proteins
in our bodies
and are made up of DNA.
Every animal and plant
has its own DNA.
DNA has coding
and noncoding sections.
Scientists can change
the genetic code of an organism
if they know which genes
code for which information.
So now we have
the low-down on genes;
it's time to get to the bottom
of genetic manipulation.
You've seen
some dramatic results
of genetic technologies on TV:
Dolly the sheep, gene therapies,
maybe one day a cure for cancer.
But how does all this happen?
Nature often makes mistakes
in copying
a gene's DNA sequence.
The result of this is a change
in the genetic code.
We call it a mutation.
Some mutations are harmful,
but some are helpful.
Genetic manipulation allows
scientists to decide
which genes to change.
They can carefully alter
the DNA sequence,
changing the gene
and the protein it codes for.
So let's say
we have two organisms--
we'll call them A and B--
and we want to take
a gene from A
and put it into B.
Scientists use a technique
called polymerase
chain reaction, PCR,
to copy and study genes.
Let's take the DNA
from our organism and copy it.
PCR allows scientists
to make many copies of the gene
so they have enough
to work with.
The next step is to take
this section of DNA
and place it
into a second organism.
We can do this using a vector.
Scientists sometimes
use viruses as vectors.
The viruses aren't infectious
and can be packaged up
with our extra piece of DNA.
The viral vector takes
this new genetic material
and places it
inside our target cell.
Or here's another way to do it.
The gene can also be
incorporated
into a little ring of DNA
called a plasmid.
This DNA ring
is taken into the foreign cell
and incorporated
into the genetic code.
Those few steps form the basis
of genetic modification.
Of course, when you talk about
genetic engineering,
most people think of cloning.
To clone means to copy.
We can clone a piece of DNA
to put it into another organism.
This is called
molecular cloning.
We could clone a cell
to make many copies of it.
This is called cellular cloning.
But what about making
a copy of a whole organism?
For this,
scientists use a technique
known as nuclear cloning
or somatic cell
nuclear transfer, SCNT.
They take the nucleus
of a normal body cell,
which contains all its DNA,
and put it into an egg cell
which has had
its own nucleus removed.
So the egg cell
has its DNA replaced
and the idea is that
the new egg cell will develop
into an organism with
identical DNA to the original.
You've probably heard
of Dolly the sheep.
She was the first animal
to be cloned this way.
Of course,
this isn't just science fiction.
Genetic modification and cloning
are being used for all sorts
of things right now.
We often refer to this
as biotechnology.
Biotechnology is technology
based on biology.
Up next, we visit scientists
in their labs
to see some
biotechnology in action.
So genetic modification
is based on the idea
of copying a gene
and placing it inside
another organism or cell.
By copying genes
and attaching them to a vector,
new genes can be added
to an organism's genetic code.
Scientists can also
clone genes or organisms.
One of the most exciting areas
of genetic research
applies to the health
and well-being of humans.
So how can doctors
use genetic manipulation?
Imagine being able
to cure a disease
by changing
a person's genetic code.
Already scientists can identify
the genes that cause
some diseases and then work
on changing those genes.
Heidi Peters
is a doctor and scientist
at the Royal Children's Hospital
in Melbourne.
She works with children
who have an unusual problem
with their livers.
- So I work on a condition
called methylmalonic aciduria.
And that's a disorder
of organic acid metabolism.
It's inherited, it's rare,
and it's a problem
with the breakdown of certain--
with the breakdown
of protein, really,
and certain amino acids.
So you have
an enzyme that's missing,
and that enzyme causes
methylmalonic aciduria--
acid to be built up in the body
and causes
the patient to become unwell.
I look after patients with
rare metabolic disorders,
and as part of that,
you become frustrated
that there's no new, novel
therapies for these patients,
and you have a very limited
amount of treatment available.
And I guess that's
sort of driven me
to want to look at development
of novel therapies
to try and help treat
these patients.
- So Heidi works
with children who have MMA,
and she also does
research in the lab
to try to find a treatment
for the disease.
The first part of her research
involves transplanting
healthy liver cells into mice.
- So the mice are a model
for the condition
that I'm interested in,
so the methylmalonic aciduria,
and these mice
are transgenic mice,
and they have a phenotype,
or they have characteristics
that would be similar
to a mild form
of the MMA condition.
- So these mice
have had a gene inserted
that gives them
a mild form of MMA.
They're transgenic.
Heidi's team transplants
healthy cells into the mice.
The transplanted cells
produce the missing enzyme,
so that's one way MMA
could be treated.
The next step is to genetically
change the cells
before they're transplanted.
- So one way is to take
the cells for transplant,
treat them with a viral
gene therapy vector
or a nonviral approach and--
so that they overexpress
the gene of interest,
so, in this case, the MMA gene--
and then to transplant those
enhanced cells into the liver
so that each cell
will be more effective
than if you just transplanted
non-enhanced cells.
The thing that's exciting
for gene therapy is that--
the potential to improve
patients' health, really.
- Gene therapy
is the insertion of a gene
into an individual's cells.
The idea
is that hereditary diseases
can be treated by adding
a new healthy gene.
Heidi's team are planning
to treat healthy liver cells
with a gene
that will make them produce
even more of the missing enzyme.
Then they'll put the cells
into the patients,
well, mice at this stage.
- So with viral gene therapy,
you are putting in--
using a virus to deliver
a gene of interest
that may not be
working properly,
or you want to overexpress,
essentially,
into a cell or into a body
or into an organ
so that it can then
start functioning.
So that's one form
of gene therapy.
What I enjoy about the work
is that it gives me
the opportunity
to be able to sort of study
something that might be able
to be of benefit
for treating patients.
I think really
that's what drives me.
The aim would be to improve
their life, essentially,
to reduce the burden
of the disease
on that patient and that family.
Hopefully, give them
a better quality of life
and a longer life.
- So you can see
there are already
some exciting medical uses
of genetic modification.
Gene therapy
could also treat diseases
like muscular dystrophy
or cystic fibrosis,
and there's a lot more research
going on around the world.
There's also
xenotransplantation.
That's when animals are used
to grow human organs.
Many people die each year
because of a lack
of donor organs,
but transgenic pigs
could provide a good source
of humanlike organs
that wouldn't be rejected
by human immune systems.
Scientists can
also use biotechnology
to create proteins
in their laboratory
for medical use.
The insulin diabetics
need to survive
used to be sourced from pigs.
Thanks to biotechnology,
insulin is now made
in a laboratory
by inserting artificial genes
into bacteria.
The bacteria then produce
the vital insulin needed
to help keep people
with diabetes alive.
These proteins are called
recombinant proteins.
This technology already
has a wide range
of medical and scientific uses.
There are a number of medical
uses of genetic manipulation.
Gene therapy involves
adding a gene to a cell
in order to treat
an inherited condition.
The gene can then produce
a protein
that was previously missing
or faulty in that cell.
Other techniques
now being researched include
creating human proteins using
modified bacteria or animals
and xenotransplantation.
Of course, genetics doesn't
just apply to humans.
All animals and plants have DNA.
Genetic modification
also offers exciting ways
to protect animals from disease.
Let's take a look inside
the CSIRO's Australian
Animal Health Labs.
Kathleen McLachlan
is a PhD student there.
- My research is in developing
better ways to protect livestock
from viruses
which cause disease,
and the way
that I've been doing this
is to use a new technology
called RNA interference.
The major benefit
of RNA interference
is that you can
specifically silence genes.
- Kathleen is working
on finding ways
to stop disease in farm animals.
In her lab, they're studying
something call RNA interference.
To put it simply,
they're using
the natural response of cells
against viruses
to silence genes.
- Gene silencing is when you
switch off a gene.
So you have a gene
that's normally active,
and we call that switched on,
and you use RNA interference
to silence the gene,
or switch it off.
So if you think of it like
a dimmer-style light switch,
when the gene's normally active,
the light is at its brightest.
When you use RNA interference
to silence the gene,
you decrease protein production,
and it's like turning down
the dimmer light switch.
And then if you completely
silence the gene
and there's
no protein production,
it's like the light
is switched off,
and the gene's silenced.
- So by turning off,
or silencing,
a gene within the virus,
Kathleen's team is working
to prevent the virus
from infecting animal cells.
They're trying to block
the conversion of RNA to protein
for a particular gene that
the virus needs to infect cells.
Right now, they're working
on protecting chickens,
but who knows what kind
of vaccines
this research might lead to.
Agricultural science is a really
important area of research.
It's all about making
farm animals and crops
stronger and healthier
to create food for more people.
It's now possible to select
desirable characteristics
for a crop.
So maybe you need a plant
that grows in salty soil
or very cold weather.
Scientists can identify
and transfer genes
that make a plant resistant
to certain conditions
into another crop.
These genes
are transferred to vectors
that can transfer
into the plant's cells.
We call these transgenic plants.
Transgenic organisms
are those that have a gene
transferred
from another species.
In nature, genes are sometimes
passed between species,
but this happens
over a long, long time.
In a laboratory,
it's a much speedier process.
Transgenic crops can be
engineered to be pest resistant.
It's also possible
to create transgenic animals
by transferring a gene
from one species to another.
Transgenic cows
can have a gene inserted
to make them produce more milk
or milk with less cholesterol.
There are transgenic sheep
that produce more wool
and cattle
that produce better meat.
Scientists are
using these technologies
to figure out ways to increase
farmers' yields and profits.
The hope here is that they'll
be able to feed more people
using less land, less water,
and fewer chemicals.
Genetic manipulation
can allow scientists
to grow stronger, bigger,
and healthier crops and animals.
Scientists can transfer genes
from one species to another.
This produces transgenic crops
and animals.
They can select genes
that make crops grow
in difficult conditions.
They can also use
genetic manipulation
to protect crops and animals
from disease or pests.
It's not just
people and industry
that benefit from
genetic manipulation.
Genetic technologies
can also play a big role
in keeping our environment
safe and clean.
We've already seen
how transgenic crops
can help farmers grow more food
in harsh conditions,
but this technology
can also be used
to conserve
sensitive environments.
Dr. John Patterson has
good reason to be interested
in helping farmers
and the environment.
- So I grew up in the country
on a farm, in East Gippsland
and had always wanted to get
into agricultural research.
- Today
John is working to create
crops that can survive
in areas that are dry and salty.
- The main goals of our research
is to develop crops
with improved tolerances
to different
environmental stresses,
so things like
drought and salinity,
which are major issues
for Australian farmers.
The work that I do focuses on
looking at the proteins
and how the proteins
in different plants respond--
change in response
to different stresses.
If we can identify proteins
that allow a plant to survive in
a dry or a saline environment,
we can use that information
to develop improved varieties
that might express that protein,
or that gene,
and use that to prove
the tolerance of other plants.
- John identifies plants
that are tolerant
to dry or salty conditions.
He compares the genome of these
to plants that can't survive
in the same
dry, salty conditions.
By doing this,
John can figure out
which genes might
be the ones that make a plant
tolerant to drought or salinity.
- The next step,
once we identify these genes,
is to put them
into intolerant varieties
and see if they have any effect
on improving
the drought tolerance
of those plants.
So the way we do that
is through a process
of transgenesis where
we actually insert the genes
that we think are interesting
into these intolerant varieties
and look at the effects.
So these types of approaches
are looking very promising,
and we are in the process
of developing some crops
with some important
agricultural traits
that will have benefits
for Australian farmers.
The research that
I've talked about today
does have a number of positive
impacts on the environment
as well as
the economic benefits.
By creating varieties
of crops that have
improved drought tolerance
or improved salinity tolerance,
we can grow more crop
in less area of land.
So we can use less land
for agricultural productivity,
and also we use less water
to grow the same amount
of crops.
I really hope that we can
identify some genes
and then use this information
to develop some varieties
with really improved
water use efficiency
and drought tolerance
and get that research
out into the field
so that farmers can actually
use this information.
- John's work has economic,
social,
and environmental impacts,
and he's not alone.
Scientists around the world
are working
on similar genetic technologies.
Many industries produce
pollution that finds its way
into our waterways, our air,
and our soil.
Biotechnology is finding ways
to clean up contaminated areas.
One involves phytoremediation.
Phytoremediation is a way
of cleaning up pollution
using plants that are able
to break down
polluting chemicals.
Biotechnology allows scientists
to find genes from these species
and put them
into another species
better suited
to the cleanup site.
So cleaning up oil spills
in the ocean, for example,
is becoming much
faster and more effective.
This technology,
called bioremediation,
uses genetically
modified bacteria
to clean up toxic spills
or turn waste
into less harmful chemicals.
Another big problem
in natural environments
is invasive species.
Genetic technologies
are already being tested
on preventing
the spread of some pests.
Daughterless carp and toads
have been developed
in Australian laboratories.
By genetically modifying
the pest species
so they can't reproduce,
their environmental impact
can be dramatically reduced.
Genetic manipulation
can play a role
in conserving our environment.
Work on drought-
and salinity-tolerant crops
can help the agriculture
industry and the environment.
For many people
in the community,
genetic manipulation offers
new and exciting technology,
medical miracles,
or better
environmental protection.
But new science and technology
always comes with fears.
Is it really okay to change
the genetic code?
Who should decide
what the limits
to genetic engineering are?
It can be
a very emotional topic.
Like all new science,
researchers work hard
to test these technologies
in the laboratory before they
are used out in the real world.
Many people have concerns
about the risks
of changing the genes of crops.
They're concerned
about long-term health risks
and also about effects
on biodiversity.
One major concern
is cross-pollination.
Since the pollen of some plants
can be spread so widely
by wind, insects, or birds,
it's difficult to control
how plants interbreed.
If the pollen
of a genetically modified plant
is spread to normal plants,
the new characteristic
will appear in other plants too.
This isn't always a problem.
But it is important to consider
what the long-term
effects might be.
For example,
what if we make some crops
resistant to herbicide
and this trait spreads
to nearby weeds?
Some people think that the risks
of genetic manipulation
are too great.
Others say it's unethical and
that humans shouldn't play God.
Ethics and safety
are an important
consideration in biotechnology.
With genetic manipulation,
it's important to consider
all the outcomes
and to test the technology
well before it's applied.
But problems arise when people
disagree on the ethics
of a new technology.
For example,
we all know it's unfair
for athletes to cheat
and that's why competitions
like the Olympics
have rules against using drugs
to enhance performance.
But consider gene doping.
That's when genes
or genetic material
are used to improve a person's
athletic performance.
At the moment, it's impossible
to test for gene doping.
It doesn't involve using drugs,
but is it ethical?
Other questions about the ethics
of genetic manipulation
focus on the potential
of parents
to select characteristics
of their baby.
If this were possible,
would some traits disappear?
And is it ethical?
If gene therapy
and other treatments
become widely available,
will they be provided
to everyone,
or will people with more money
be the only ones
who can extend their
good health and their lives?
Genetic manipulation
has great potential
to improve our lives
for the better,
but there are definitely
some big questions
to be asked along the way.
It's important to consider the
ethics and all possible outcomes
of using new technologies
and treatments.
Scientists work
to test the impacts
of any genetic modification
before it's used
outside the lab.
One concern is that humans
shouldn't be playing God
by changing their genome
or that this technology
will not be available
equally to everyone.
Genetic manipulation
is a very recent science,
and we're still in the early
stages of figuring out
how it can be used.
In this program,
we've seen how manipulating
the genetic code
can have applications
in human, agricultural,
and environmental health
and science.
This technology also has
economic and social impacts,
so the possibilities
of genetic manipulation
are extremely far reaching.
By understanding the way
genetic manipulation works
as well as its potential,
we can all play an informed role
in making decisions
about the future of science.